Prep Upgrade Guide and Release Notes for Gradle 9 RC1 (#33838)
gradle/gradle: platforms/documentation/docs/src/docs/userguide/releases/upgrading/upgrading_version_8.adoc

[[changes_9.0]]
== Upgrading from 8.14 and earlier

=== Language and DSL changes

> ==== Java 17 is now required

Reviewer: PTAL

For full details and potential breaking changes, consult the link:https://github.com/JetBrains/kotlin/releases/tag/v2.1.21[Kotlin release notes].

==== Kotlin DSL now uses the Kotlin language version 2.1

In Gradle 9, the Kotlin DSL has been upgraded to use Kotlin language version 2.1, whereas Gradle 8.x used version 1.8.
For details, see the Kotlin 2.1 release notes.

Due to changes in how the Kotlin 2 compiler handles script compilation, you can no longer refer to the script instance using labels like `this@Build_gradle`, `this@Settings_gradle`, or `this@Init_gradle`.
If they are used to reference the DSL script target object, then use `project`, `settings`, or `gradle` instead.
If they are used to reference a top-level symbol that happens to have the same name as a nested symbol, then use a different name, possibly by adding an intermediary variable.

Read the link:#jspecify[JSpecify section] below to learn about potential breaking changes in Kotlin build logic code related to nullability.

[[groovy-4]]
==== Upgrade to Groovy 4.0.27

> Groovy has been upgraded from version 3.0.24 to https://groovy-lang.org/changelogs/changelog-4.0.27.html[4.0.27].
> For a complete overview of changes from 3.x to 4.x, see the https://groovy-lang.org/releasenotes/groovy-4.0.html[Groovy 4.0 release notes].
> 
> The update to Groovy 4 comes with many breaking changes, such as the removal of legacy packages, changes in the module structure, a parser rewrite, and bytecode output changes.
> For a complete overview of these and more changes from 3.x to 4.x, see the https://groovy-lang.org/releasenotes/groovy-4.0.html[Groovy 4.0 release notes].
> These changes may affect those who use Groovy directly or indirectly in Gradle, and in rare cases, users relying on transitive dependencies.
> 

Reviewer 2: :x: Merge these two paragraphs so the link isn't repeated.

```suggestion
Groovy has been upgraded from version 3.0.24 to https://groovy-lang.org/changelogs/changelog-4.0.27.html[4.0.27].
The update to Groovy 4 comes with many breaking changes, such as the removal of legacy packages, changes in the module structure, a parser rewrite, and bytecode output changes.
For a complete overview of these and more changes from 3.x to 4.x, see the https://groovy-lang.org/releasenotes/groovy-4.0.html[Groovy 4.0 release notes].
These changes may affect those who use Groovy directly or indirectly in Gradle, and in rare cases, users relying on transitive dependencies.
```

Reviewer: And maybe this can clarify that the link is about Groovy _language_ changes: "For a complete overview of Groovy language changes from 3.x to 4.x, see the https://groovy-lang.org/releasenotes/groovy-4.0.html[Groovy 4.0 release notes]."

For full details and potential breaking changes, consult the link:https://github.com/JetBrains/kotlin/releases/tag/v2.1.21[Kotlin release notes].

> ==== Kotlin DSL now uses the Kotlin language version 2.1

Author: @eskatos, can you PTAL?

In Gradle 9, the Kotlin DSL has been upgraded to use Kotlin language version 2.1, whereas Gradle 8.x used version 1.8.
For details, see the Kotlin 2.1 release notes.

Due to changes in how the Kotlin 2 compiler handles script compilation, you can no longer refer to the script instance using labels like `this@Build_gradle`, `this@Settings_gradle`, or `this@Init_gradle`.
If they are used to reference the DSL script target object, then use `project`, `settings`, or `gradle` instead.
If they are used to reference a top-level symbol that happens to have the same name as a nested symbol, then use a different name, possibly by adding an intermediary variable.

> Read the link:#jspecify[JSpecify section] below to learn about potential breaking changes in Kotlin build logic code related to nullability.

Author: @eskatos, can you PTAL?

    failOnNoDiscoveredTests = false
}
----
=====
[.multi-language-sample]
=====
.build.gradle
[source,groovy]
----
tasks.withType(AbstractTestTask).configureEach {
    failOnNoDiscoveredTests = false
}
----
=====
====

==== Stale outputs outside the build directory are no longer deleted

In previous versions of Gradle, class files located outside the build directory were deleted when considered stale. This was a special case for class files registered as outputs of a source set.

Because this setup is uncommon and forced Gradle to eagerly realize all compile related tasks in every build, the behavior has been removed in Gradle 9.

Gradle will continue to clean up stale outputs inside the build directory as needed.

==== `model` and `component` tasks are no longer automatically added

The `model` and `component` tasks report on the structure of legacy software model objects configured for the project.
Previously, these tasks were automatically added to the project for every build.
These tasks are now only added to a project when a rule-based plugin is applied (such as those provided by Gradle's support for building native software).

=== Configuration Cache changes

> ==== Unsupported build event listeners are now configuration cache problems

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
==== Unsupported build event listeners are no longer silently discarded in the Configuration Cache execution mode
```

It reads funny otherwise

The build event listener registration method
link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/build/event/BuildEventsListenerRegistry.html#onTaskCompletion(org.gradle.api.provider.Provider)[`BuildEventsListenerRegistry.onTaskCompletion`]
accepts arbitrary providers of any
link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/tooling/events/OperationCompletionListener.html[`OperationCompletionListener`]
implementations.
However, only providers returned from
link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/services/BuildServiceRegistry.html#registerIfAbsent(java.lang.String,java.lang.Class,org.gradle.api.Action)[`BuildServiceRegistry.registerIfAbsent`]
or
link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/services/BuildServiceRegistration.html#getService()[`BuildServiceRegistration.getService`]
are currently supported when the Configuration Cache is enabled.

> Previously, unsupported providers were silently discarded and never received events when the configuration cache was used.

Reviewer 3: Is it still a case when graceful degradation is enabled? Why should we fail the build instead of degrading in such a case? CC @6hundreds

Starting with Gradle 9, registering such providers now causes a configuration cache problem and fails the build.

If your build was previously working with the configuration cache (e.g., the listeners were nonessential),

> you can temporarily revert to the old behavior by setting:

Reviewer 3: There is a strange-reading mix between listeners and providers in the text. IIUC those are listeners who are incompatible, and the provider just supplies those listeners

Author: Will look into this for RC2/GA.

Reviewer 4: > IIUC those are listeners who are incompatible, and the provider just supplies those listeners

You can have incompatible listeners or incompatible providers of compatible listeners. Neither of these actually worked. Compatible providers can only provide compatible listeners.
